Why Roots.io?

Roots isn’t a framework in the traditional sense, but it has evolved into something that brings the Wordpress platform into the realm of traditional web development frameworks like php’s laravel, JavaScript’s node.js, or Ruby on Rails.

The team at Roots.io has developed three separate tools that can be leveraged independently or used in harmony to create what is colloquially known as the Roots framework. The first of these tools is Trellis, a server provisioning tool used for setting up local development environments as well as staging & production environments for WordPress sites. Trellis uses Ansible to provision servers with a Modern LEMP stack: Linux Ubuntu 16.04, Nginx, MariaDB (MySQL drop-in replacement), & PHP 7.2. Trellis also installs additional tools such as Composer for managing dependencies & WP-CLI for managing your WordPress installation.

The next of the three tools in the Roots framework is bedrock, a modified & improved WordPress install to base your sites off of. Bedrock provides support for separating configurations depending on your environment, using environment variables to secure sensitive information, & other security measures such as isolating the web root to limit access to non-web files. Bedrock also uses bcrypt to hash more secure passwords, a much needed improvement considering, without Bedrock, WordPress still uses the outdated, insecure md5 password hashing algorithm. A few other things provided by bedrock are the use of PSR-2 coding standards, using Composer for php package management, & renaming the “wp-content” directory to the industry standard “app”.

The third & final tool in the Roots framework is Sage, a starter theme for WordPress with a modern development workflow. Sage comes out of the box with webpack to support Sass stylesheets, image optimization, synchronized browser testing, & more. The biggest advantage of using Sage for WordPress themes is the integration of Laravael’s blade templating for php. The blade templating engine lets you write more readable code & helps stop you from repeating yourself over & over again by allowing you to reuse sections of code, similar to something like React components.

While, at the end of the day, WordPress is just a CMS & not a framework, the tools provided by the team at Roots help to bring WordPress closer to the best practices of the industry & help to secure websites while also making them easier & safer to develop & maintain. If you’re sold on using WordPress, you should be using some or all of these tools, no question about it!
